KANDA: A Multimodal Embodied Robot Agent

Driven by

Large Language Models for Hardware-Conscious

Command Generation

Abstract—KANDA is presented as a low-budget, multimodal
and embodied agent which was developed at a total cost of
less than $77 by using ESP32, Raspberry Pi 4 and a camera
module. The agent has capabilities to search named objects, indoor
navigation, and speech as well as keyboard input instructions. Groq
Llama 3.3 deals with language reasoning, whereas NVIDIA NIM
Llama 3.2 Vision handles visual reasoning. A three-layered control
architecture based on Brooks’ subsumption model is employed:
(i) a body-context prompt grounding the LLM in live sensor data
and action limits, (ii) a deterministic critic on the Pi mapping
LLM output to legal commands or stop, and (iii) a firmware
reflex on the ESP32 halting motion when ultrasonic range falls
below 15 cm, independent of cloud latency. Ablation over 10 trials
per condition shows that removing scene context leads to 15%
unsafe plans, absence of episodic memory causes 60% redundant
search steps, and disabling the firmware stop results in 30%
near-miss events. On 60 voice utterances, macro-averaged intent
F1 is 0.94, visual search succeeds in 8 of 10 trials, and all eight
injected faults terminate safely.

Index Terms—embodied AI, deliberative–critic–reflex architec-
ture, vision-language grounding, command validation, episodic

visual search, layered safety, ESP32, Raspberry Pi
I. Introduction

Embodied artificial intelligence has advanced considerably
over the past three years, but the systems that demonstrate the
most impressive capabilities tend to require hardware and data
resources that are beyond the reach of most research groups.
PaLM-E [?] employs a 562-billion-parameter model trained
on massive multimodal corpora. SayCan [?] targets mobile
manipulators that cost upwards of one hundred thousand dollars
and requires tens of thousands of demonstration episodes to
learn affordance functions. RT-1 [?] and its successor RT-2 [?]

depend on large-scale teleoperation datasets and web-scale fine-
tuning that presuppose institutional-level compute budgets. This

paper asks a practical question: can comparable behaviours—
voice interaction, indoor navigation, visual object search, and
collision avoidance—run on commodity hardware costing under
eighty dollars, with zero robot-specific training, using only a
hosted vision-language API for reasoning?
Attempting to build such a system immediately exposes four
engineering gaps that existing literature does not adequately
address. The first is the absence of body context. When a large
language model is asked to control a robot without being told
what movements are physically possible, what speed range the

Fig. 1. KANDA hardware: ESP32 DevKit, Raspberry Pi 4, Pi Camera v2.1,
three HC-SR04 ultrasonic sensors, SSD1306 OLED, and TB6612FNG motor
driver.

motors accept, or what the sensors currently report, the model
produces infeasible commands. This problem has been noted
on larger platforms as well [?], [?]. The second gap is intent
ambiguity. A spoken phrase like “go forward” requires a single
validated motor command, while “find my bottle” requires a
totally different execution pathway that follows a multi-step
visual loop inspired by observation-driven planners such as
Inner Monologue [?] and ReAct [?]. The third challenge is
referred to as model garbage, where the language model often
produces action plans that are either corrupted, enclosed in
markdown code fences, or with hallucinated action names
not aligned with any motor primitive [?]. The final issue is
the timing mismatch, which is the most critical among all.
There can be a physical obstruction blocking the robot in 100
milliseconds [?], whereas cloud inference would take 1.5 to 4
seconds. A system that waits for the cloud before reacting to
proximity threats is fundamentally unsafe.
KANDA addresses these four gaps through a body-context
assembler that grounds every model call in live hardware state,
an intent routing mechanism that classifies utterances before
dispatching them, a total validator function V that maps any
model output to a safe motor command, and firmware-level
reflexes on the ESP32 that halt motion independently of the
Raspberry Pi or the cloud.
This paper makes six contributions. First, it presents a fully
functional multimodal embodied agent built for under $77 that
supports voice, vision, and text interaction including Telegram
Page 3 of 8 - AI Writing Submission Submission ID trn:oid:::3618:140951365

Page 3 of 8 - AI Writing Submission Submission ID trn:oid:::3618:140951365

remote control. Second, it introduces a body-context grounding
scheme with a shared action vocabulary that is consistent across
the prompt, the validator, and the firmware parser. Third, it
describes an intent classification mechanism combined with an

episodic visual search loop. Fourth, it provides ablation evi-
dence for a deliberative–critic–reflex safety architecture. Fifth,

it demonstrates a seven-state machine design that preserves
fast obstacle handling despite slow cloud inference calls. Sixth,
it includes demonstration and presentation modes suitable for
classroom and exhibition deployment. Implementation artifacts
including the vision module, firmware source, and test scripts
are available in the project repository.
II. Related Work

The problem of grounding language models in physical
robot capabilities has been approached from several directions.
SayCan [?] learns affordance functions from thousands of
demonstration episodes and uses these to score which actions
are physically feasible given the current state. Through the
introduction of the affordances within the prompt language
without any training cost, KANDA implements an entirely new
approach. In this case, the model simply becomes aware of
the actions that can be performed, the valid speed limits, and

the present sensor measurements. It was shown through chain-
of-thought prompting [?] that structured thinking improves

the executability of the model, and the works of Huang et

al. [?] proved that language models can be utilized as zero-
shot planners as long as they are designed properly. With the

incorporation of telemetry measurements in every inference
step, our body-context method builds on this insight.

Several systems compose language model output into exe-
cutable control programs. Socratic Models [?] chain multiple

foundation models together, Code as Policies [?] generates
Python control code from natural language, and ProgPrompt [?]
frames robotic tasks as program synthesis problems. These
approaches are powerful but produce complex outputs that
are difficult to validate at runtime. KANDA deliberately
restricts the interface to single-line JSON commands that are
validated before UART transmission, trading expressiveness
for verifiability. Inner Monologue [?] and ReAct [?] interleave
environment observations with model decisions in a closed
loop. Our visual search mechanism draws on this principle
but replaces the explicit chain-of-thought trace with VLM
scene descriptions and an episodic deduplication memory that
prevents the robot from revisiting previously explored locations.
On the safety side, Amodei et al. [?] argued that structural

safeguards are necessary beyond simply scaling model capabil-
ities, because larger models do not automatically become safer.

Brooks [?] established the subsumption architecture in which
fast reactive layers operate independently of and can override
slower deliberative layers. The Dynamic Window Approach [?]
provides a formal basis for velocity-space obstacle avoidance
that informs our ultrasonic threshold design. Edge and fog
computing surveys [?], [?] provide the architectural motivation
for placing safety-critical logic on the microcontroller while
keeping computationally expensive reasoning on the more

capable processor. Systems like ProgPrompt implicitly filter
generated programs through type checking, but KANDA makes
the critic layer explicit and deterministic, and pairs it with a
hardware reflex that cannot be circumvented through prompt
engineering or model hallucination.

III. Formal Problem Definition
Before describing the system architecture, we define the
constraints that any valid command must satisfy. The robot’s
action vocabulary consists of seven motor primitives: A =
{forward, backward, left, right,slight left,slight right,stop}.
Each command pairs one of these actions with an integer
speed value drawn from the range [0, 255], which corresponds
to the PWM duty cycle applied to the motor driver.
Definition 1 (Safe command). A command c =
(action,speed) is considered safe if and only if both its action
field belongs to the vocabulary and its speed field is a bounded
integer:
c.action ∈ A ∧ c.speed ∈ Z ∧ 0 ≤ c.speed ≤ 255 (1)
Definition 2 (Critic / validator). The validator is a total
function V : Any → A × [0, 255] that must satisfy two
properties: every output it produces is safe according to Eq. (1),
and it terminates without raising an exception regardless of
what input it receives:
∀ x : V(x) satisfies Eq. (1) ∧ V terminates without exception
(2)
In practice this means that any unrecognised action name is
mapped to stop, any non-integer speed value is mapped to
stop, and any numeric speed that falls outside the valid range
is clamped to the nearest boundary before transmission (see
Listing 2).
Definition 3 (Timing constraint). The firmware reflex must
respond to obstacles on a timescale that is fundamentally faster
than the cloud inference path. We measure the reflex latency
treflex as the time from detecting an object within 15 cm to
halting motor output:
treflex ≪ tcloud, treflex ≈ 47 ms (mean), tcloud ∈ [1500, 4000] ms
(3)

The ESP32 firmware runs a single cooperative loop at approx-
imately 10 Hz using a 100 ms delay between iterations. The

reflex logic executes within this loop and does not wait for any
response from the cloud or the Raspberry Pi before stopping
the motors.

IV. System Design

A. Three Tiers

The system is organised into three processing tiers, illus-
trated in Fig. 2. Each tier is designed to reach a safe state

independently if the tiers above it fail or become unreachable.
The cloud tier is responsible for all language and vision
reasoning. It uses Groq for text-based inference and NVIDIA
NIM for visual understanding, with the temperature parameter
set to 0.1 for classification tasks to reduce output randomness.
This level performs scene or target analysis, intent classification,
Page 4 of 8 - AI Writing Submission Submission ID trn:oid:::3618:140951365

Page 4 of 8 - AI Writing Submission Submission ID trn:oid:::3618:140951365

Fig. 2. Three-tier layout: cloud deliberation, edge critic and state machine,
device reflex and sensing.

and generates JSON actions. Its latency ranges from 1.5 to 4
seconds depending on network conditions and prompt length,
and crucially, all outputs from this tier are treated as untrusted
until they pass through the critic.
The edge tier runs on the Raspberry Pi 4 and hosts the
Python-based vision module. It contains the state machine, the
body-context builder, the plan executor, the openWakeWord [?]
wake phrase detector trained on Hey Kanda, the gTTS speech
synthesis output, and the Telegram message polling loop.
The device tier runs on the ESP32 microcontroller. It
samples three HC-SR04 ultrasonic sensors on each iteration of
its main loop, parses one incoming JSON command per line
from the UART, and applies an emergency stop whenever the
robot is moving forward and the front sensor reports a range
below 15 cm.

These three tiers map onto a deliberative–critic–reflex decom-
position that mirrors the subsumption architecture proposed by

Brooks [?]: the cloud tier acts as the deliberative layer proposing
actions conditioned on body context; the edge tier acts as
the critic layer where the validator V rejects or clamps every
command before transmission (Listing 2); and the device tier
acts as the reflex layer halting motors and reporting OBSTACLE
independently of cloud latency. To ensure the non-blocking
nature of THINKING and SEARCHING states, a heartbeat
thread is run on the Pi (100 ms interval) which forwards obstacle
detection events up the chain.

B. Wire Communication Protocol
Text-based protocol is used for communication between
the Raspberry Pi and the ESP32 via UART link at 115,200
baud. The Pi sends a single JSON object per line such
as {"action":"forward","speed":120,"state":"searching"}. The
ESP32 sends newline-separated telemetry strings such as F:30.5
L:21.0 R:16.4 -> FORWARD, describing its sensor readings and its
state at the moment. The selected approach allows the developer
to debug the communication channel without specialized tools
by using an arbitrary serial monitor.

You are a robot with two wheels called KANDA.
Capabilities include forward, reverse, left, right,
slight left, slight right, and stop.
Speed range: from 0 to 255. Camera resolution: 640x480.
Restrictions: only approximate turns, no stairs or arm.
Sensors:
Left sensor = 18.4 cm WARNING: imminent collision
Right sensor = 62.0 cm
Left sensor = 25.3 cm
Scene: "A desk with laptop and water bottle."
Final actions: ["forward," "forward," "slight_left"]
State: Searching.
"I need to find my water bottle." User stated.
JSON ONLY in your answer please.
Listing 1. Body-context block (rebuilt each inference call)

V. Mechanisms
A. Body-Context Assembler
Each time the model performs its inference, there is always

a prior textual block that is produced using the body-context as-
sembler. This textual block contains the latest scene description

generated by the vision model, information regarding movement
abilities, speed constraints, current sensor data, and proximity
alarms, along with the latest set of actions performed. An
example of such a block is illustrated in Listing 1 below.
B. Task Agent and Episodic Visual Search
Each user utterance is classified into one of four classes—

COMMAND for motion commands, QUESTION for scene de-
scription requests, TASK for complex goals such as finding an

object, and UNKNOWN for utterances that cannot be translated
to any existing behaviour. To avoid unbounded planning,
the algorithm generates a JSON list of up to 50 steps for
TASK class utterances including actions such as move, talk,
capture_check, loop_while, and wait.
The search routine in Algorithm 1 operates through repeated
image capture and the subsequent use of the vision classifier
to generate a description of the environment, which is then
filtered for the target by using the Ratcliff–Obershelp string
similarity measure [?] based on episodic memory (threshold
τ=0.7, reduced to 0.5 after five visits), to see if the object of
interest is present, and if not, to pick a movement based on
ultrasonic geometry. This approach is conceptually related to
ReAct [?] but replaces the explicit chain-of-thought trace with
episodic deduplication memory.
C. Safety Validator (Critic)
The safety validator is the deterministic critic layer that sits
between the language model output and the UART transmission
to the ESP32. It enforces four invariants on every command
that passes through it:
I1 : r is a dict with keys action, speed (4)
I2 : r[action] ∈ A else stop (5)
I3 : r[speed] ∈ Z after parse else stop (6)
I4 : 0 ≤ r[speed] ≤ 255 via clamp (7)
Page 5 of 8 - AI Writing Submission Submission ID trn:oid:::3618:140951365

Page 5 of 8 - AI Writing Submission Submission ID trn:oid:::3618:140951365

Algorithm 1 Episodic visual search (VLM-driven)
Require: target T, max steps N=20
1: M ← ∅; τ ← 0.7; skip ← 0
2: for i = 1 to N do
3: f ← capture(); s ← VLM.describe( f )
4: if ∃ m ∈ M : sim(s, m) > τ then
5: skip ← skip + 1
6: if skip > 5 then
7: τ ← 0.5
8: end if
9: continue
10: end if
11: M ← M ∪ {s}; skip ← 0
12: if VLM.check( f , T) = yes then
13: return found, s
14: end if
15: execute(heuristic move(sensors)); sleep
16: end for
17: return not found
SAFE = {"action": "stop", "speed": 0}
def validate(cmd):
if not isinstance(cmd, dict): return SAFE
action = cmd.get("action")
speed = cmd.get("speed", 100)
if action not in VALID_ACTIONS: return SAFE
try: speed = int(speed)
except: return SAFE
speed = max(0, min(255, speed))
return {"action": action, "speed": speed}
Listing 2. Critic V: total, safe output (matches safety_validator.py)
D. Firmware Reflex and Pi Cancel
On each iteration of the ESP32 main loop, the firmware
checks whether the robot is currently moving forward. If
it is, and the front ultrasonic sensor reports a distance dF
below 15 cm, the firmware immediately sets motor output to
zero, transitions the internal state to obstacle, and includes
the string OBSTACLE in its next telemetry transmission. The
mean measured latency from obstacle detection to motor halt
is 47 ± 21 ms (Table IV). This latency is dominated by the
100 ms loop period and the ultrasonic sampling time, not by
any dependence on cloud round-trip time. On the Pi side, a
heartbeat thread running at 100 ms intervals continuously reads
telemetry, updates the body-context data structures, and sets
a global cancel flag that causes any active THINKING or
SEARCHING state to exit cleanly without waiting for its cloud
call to return.
E. Seven-State Machine

The vision module on the Pi implements a seven-state ma-
chine with states IDLE, LISTENING, THINKING, ACTING,

SEARCHING, SPEAKING, and REPORTING, as illustrated in
Fig. 3. Four threads run concurrently on the Pi: the wake word
detection thread, the ESP32 heartbeat and telemetry thread, the
Telegram message polling thread, and the text-to-speech output
queue. A critical design constraint is that no cloud call and
no search step is permitted to block the reflex handling path.

Fig. 3. Seven-state machine with global cancel on obstacle detection or stop
command.
The cancel mechanism is entirely event-driven from inbound
telemetry, ensuring that obstacle detection propagates to the
state machine within one heartbeat period regardless of what
the deliberative layer is doing.
VI. Evaluation

A. Experimental Protocol
All experiments were conducted in a 3 × 4 m indoor lab

(desks, chairs, bookshelf; ambient noise <40 dB; local Wi-
Fi) using Groq Llama 3.3 for text, NVIDIA NIM Llama 3.2

Vision for vision, firmware firmware_phase4.ino, and
Python 3.10+ on Pi OS. Results were recorded manually by
two operators.

The metrics used are: Action correct (successful mo-
tion/search result consistent with request), Intent correct (label

consistent with program categories), Failure (dangerous motion,
parsing error, timeout), and Near-miss (object within 15 cm
after verification of forward motion). Six different paraphrase
types each with ten trials were involved in the voice test
(n=60). For visual search, ten trials from five different item
categories with random locations were tested, with the target
found in less than twenty motions as the objective. Ablation
study involves blocking one layer for each experiment (n=10;
Table III). Baselines include ESP32 AUTO_MODE (without

voice, but rule-based avoidance system is enabled) and prompt-
only (validator not used, offline playback of 50 output results).

The cost of hardware is shown in Table V.
B. Voice Commands
Results of Voice Command Recognition and Execution for
each of the six utterance classes are illustrated in Table I.
The macro-average values of precision, recall, and F1 for
all six classes resulted in 0.95, 0.93, and 0.94, respectively.
The wake phrase detector is an exclusive openWakeWord
model that was trained on the phrase “Hey Kanda” and saved
as hey_kanda.onnx. During the course of 30 minutes of
idle listening test, it achieved a false positive rate of below 2%
and true positive rate exceeding 95% within one metre from
the microphone.

Page 6 of 8 - AI Writing Submission Submission ID trn:oid:::3618:140951365

Page 6 of 8 - AI Writing Submission Submission ID trn:oid:::3618:140951365

TABLE I

Voice command evaluation (n=10 per utterance class).
Utterance class Intent correct Outcome correct
“Go forward” 10/10 10/10
“Turn left” 10/10 10/10
“Stop” 10/10 10/10
“What do you see?” 9/10 9/10
“Find my bottle” 10/10 8/10
“Dance for me” 8/10 7/10

TABLE II

Fault injection (n=1 trial per scenario).
Situation Observations made
Obstacle detected along path ESP32 reflex halts in 47 ms on
average (Table IV)

Cloud API timeout (15 s) Error message spoken; return to idle
API rate limit Backoff 5 s; retry works
Camera obstructed Rejected frame (<5 KB); pass

skipped

API key revoked Validator emits stop; camera now

idle

USB unplugged Pi goes idle; ESP32 sensor continues

reporting
Heavy noise in STT Error message; idle
Image with no target No objects found

C. Visual Object Search
As it took an average of seven searches to locate the target
item, the robot successfully located the target item eight
times out of ten attempts. In these two unsuccessful cases,
the problem arose due to the fact that the robot was unable
to locate the target item through any possible vantage point
within the 20-step period because it was obscured by the
furniture. In cases where the robot identified similar visually
identical environments, the value of the adaptive threshold τ
was decreased from 0.7 to 0.5 thrice.
D. Fault Injection
Eight scenarios of deliberate failures were conducted to
verify that the system is safe even under difficult conditions.
The behaviour for each of them is briefly described in Table II.
None of the scenarios resulted in a continued movement of the
robot toward the object and, consequently, all eight times, the
robot stopped within 200 ms after the initiation of the failure.
E. Ablation
Each architectural component was systematically blocked
one at a time and the evaluation was repeated. Table III shows
the failure probabilities with 95% confidence intervals over
n=10 trials per condition.
To validate the critic layer independently, we replayed 50
logged model responses through the prompt-only baseline
in which the validator always passes. This offline analysis
revealed that 42% of raw model outputs were structurally
unsafe—containing invalid action names, non-numeric speed
values, or malformed JSON—whereas after passing through

TABLE III

Ablation: various failure modes for each removed component (n=10,

95% CI).

Layer removed Failure probability Dominant failure
mode

Camera scene in
prompt

15% ± 7% Plan for invisible
obstacles
Episodic memory 60% ± 10% Return to past locations
Obstacle warnings in
prompt

20% ± 8% Forward near wall

Action vocabulary in
prompt

30% ± 9% Non-JSON / bad action
ESP32 firmware reflex 30% ± 9% Near-miss (see §VI-A)

TABLE IV

End-to-end latencies (n=20 cycles, local Wi-Fi).
Stage Mean ± SD Range
Wake word detection 62 ± 18 ms 38–95 ms
Intent classification 1.72 ± 0.41 s 1.0–2.5 s
Plan generation (6
steps)

2.89 ± 0.53 s 2.0–4.0 s
VLM scene description 2.31 ± 0.58 s 1.5–3.5 s
Camera capture +
encode

142 ± 26 ms 98–195 ms
ESP32 JSON parse 2.1 ± 0.8 ms 1.2–4.3 ms
Firmware reflex stop 47 ± 21 ms 18–92 ms

the validator V, zero percent of transmitted commands violated
the safety invariants. The AUTO_MODE baseline successfully
avoided collisions in all 10 UART-loss trials, confirming that
the firmware-level safety works independently, but it could
not follow any voice-directed goals since it has no language
understanding capability.
Among prior embodied LLM systems, SayCan [?], RT-1 [?],
and RT-2 [?] all require hardware exceeding $100k and tens
of thousands of training demonstrations. KANDA is, to our
knowledge, the only implementation that combines explicit
critic and reflex safety layers on sub-$100 commodity hardware
with zero robot-specific training.
F. Timing and Cost
Table IV presents the measured latencies for each stage of
the processing pipeline, averaged over 20 complete inference
cycles on the local Wi-Fi network. The average latency time
for the firmware reflex is approximately 40 times less than
the average latency of the classification of intent, which is
one of the most critical results gained from these experiments.
It fully justifies the decision to implement separate obstacle
handling via firmware rather than sending everything to the
cloud inference path.

VII. Discussion

This three-layer structure deals with failure cases that no
individual layer could handle separately based on the data
from the experiment. However, there is an important detail
worth considering: a command which, after validation, is safe.
However, should there be any changes to the environment, the
Page 7 of 8 - AI Writing Submission Submission ID trn:oid:::3618:140951365

Page 7 of 8 - AI Writing Submission Submission ID trn:oid:::3618:140951365

TABLE V
Bill of materials (2025 retail, USD).

Component Cost
Raspberry Pi 4 (4 GB) $35
ESP32 DevKit $4
Pi Camera v2.1 $10
Motor driver + sensors $5
Display, mic, speaker $10
Chassis, motors, battery $13
Total < $77

situation becomes risky. For example, while a clear route exists,
the model generates an appropriate command “forward”; yet,
before executing the command, an obstacle could appear in its
way. Herein lies the precise role of the firmware reflex layer,
providing constant protection despite not querying the language
model again.
On the other hand, a syntactically valid, yet semantically

wrong error cannot be addressed via the critic layer. The val-
idator will approve the language model’s “forward” command

as long as the invariant criteria are met for all four conditions
when a distant wall can be detected as not being close enough
to trigger a warning signal. These kinds of errors can be
minimized via prompt warnings and descriptions of the current
scene context; however, they cannot be fully avoided.
The ablation results in Table III demonstrate that deliberation
and reflex operate on fundamentally different timescales and
address fundamentally different failure classes. Removing the
deliberative grounding reintroduces planning errors; removing
the reflex reintroduces physical safety violations. Neither layer
is redundant with the other.
A. Limitations and Future Work
The three ultrasonic sensors leave angular blind spots, there
is no manipulation or SLAM capability, all evaluation was
conducted in a single room with small sample sizes (n=10
per ablation condition), and cloud dependency introduces both

latency and cost. Future work targets an on-device Gemma-
class model to eliminate cloud dependency, a depth camera for

denser obstacle sensing, wheel odometry for metric mapping,
and a larger multi-room evaluation with hardware-in-the-loop
logged benchmarks.

VIII. Conclusion

This paper has presented KANDA, a multimodal embodied
robot agent that demonstrates how explicit safety architecture
can make cloud-based language model reasoning viable for
physical robot control even on hardware costing less than
eighty dollars. The deliberative–critic–reflex decomposition
provides safety guarantees at three distinct timescales: the
prompt grounds the model in physical reality before inference,
the validator ensures syntactic correctness before transmission,
and the firmware reflex provides millisecond-scale protection
against obstacles regardless of network conditions.

On our evaluation suite, the system achieves a macro-
averaged intent F1 of 0.94 across 60 voice utterances, success-
fully locates target objects in 8 of 10 visual search trials, and

terminates safely under all eight injected fault scenarios. The
ablation study confirms that prompt grounding, episodic search
memory, syntactic validation, and the firmware reflex each
address a largely non-overlapping class of failures, meaning
that all four components are necessary and none is redundant
with the others.

Acknowledgment

The authors thank the Department of Information Science
and Engineering, RV College of Engineering, Bengaluru, for
laboratory support and project guidance.